Best HospitalsWhat hospitals are models of high-quality care? That is, which hospitals have the most consistently high scores for a variety of procedures.Aggregate Quality of Care ScoreFor the purposes of this question I calculate an aggregate quality of care score for each hospital in the data set.Care Category ScoresThe aggregate quality of care score is composite across four categories of care that a hospital provides to their patients. In particular:(1) Timeliness and Effectiveness: More successful care in the form of more timely and effective procedural care.(2) Mortality rates: More successful care in the form of lower mortality rates.(3) Readmission rates: More successful care in the form of lower readmission rates.(4) Infection rates: More successful care in the form of lower than expected incidence of hospital acquired infections (Please note that this data set (that I refer to as infections) is incremental to the suggested datasets. It has been used because it another important element of overall hospital care).For each of these four categories I calculate a z-score to indicate where each hospital sits relative to its peers on a standardized basis (where z-score is the normal process of standardize the distribution of scores to have a zero mean and standard deviation of 1).The aggregate quality of care score is then calculated as a weighted sum of the four care category indicators. In particular, I have weighted the four categories according to general relevance to patient experience:(1) Timeliness and Effectiveness: weight of 50% reflecting that procedural care is the primary service that patients require from a hospital.(2) Mortality rates: weight of 10% reflecting that mortality incidence across all procedures at hospitals should be fairly low, but that a patient would prefer to go somewhere that has comparatively lower mortality rate as a possible indicator of procedural deficiencies.(3) Readmission rates: weight of 20% reflecting that the risk of return to hospital is a greater possibility that death and that this is an undesirable outcome of a hospital visit, which again may be a possible indicator of procedural deficiencies.(4) Infection rates: weight of 20% reflecting that a patients don’t want to acquire incremental problems as a result of attending hospitals, which is possible indicator of procedural deficiencies relating to cleanliness and hygiene.The weights are somewhat subjective, but this appears to be a common approach in this field given the approaches used in Construction of the care category scoresEach of the four care category scores is a further composite score of the underlying factors that were deemed important to measure the quality of care in each category from the available data sets. In particular:
(1) Timeliness and Effectiveness: Within the effective care data set there are twenty-two categories of timeliness and effectiveness of care. Some of the categories are time based, so are in minutes, while others are percentages based on the frequency of an activity. For all the time-based indicators a longer time is considered worse to a shorter time, while for the percentages for some of the categories a low percentage is preferred (e.g. measure ID OP-22, the percentage of patients who leave without being seen, is better if it is a lower percentage), while for others a high percentage is preferred (e.g. measure ID OP-2, the percentage of patients to get appropriate blood thinner drugs on a timely basis, is better if it is a higher percentage). As a result, it was necessary in the data transformation process to convert the categories where a high percentage was preferred to a percentage where low is preferred by deducting the percentage in the data set from 100 to effectively invert the category score. While finally for some categories it was not clear that there was a directional relationship between the category score and overall quality of care, so they were excluded from the overall indicator. After doing the transformations to calculate the timeliness and effectiveness composite score I calculate the average z-score* (having calculated a z-score for each hospital for each of the underlying indicators across all hospitals) for each hospital across the nineteen selected categories. Overall, a low timely and effective care z-score is preferred over a high score as a possible indicator of better hospital care. (*Note: in the code I have also allowed for a weighted average for this indicator based on procedure frequency. There are pros and cons of both. I have reported results based on the simple average, however, I note that the results are not overly different either way.)(2) Mortality rates: Within the readmissions data set there are six categories of death rate (denoted with measure ID: MORT-30-AMI, MORT-30-CABG, MORT-30-HF, MORT-30-PN and MORT-30-STK). To calculate the mortality rate composite score I calculate the weighted average death rate (using the denominator or sample size of each category as the weight) for each hospital across the six categories and then calculate a z-score of the average death rate of each hospital across all hospitals. Overall, a low mortality rate is preferred over a high mortality rate as a possible indicator of better hospital care. A possible problem with this approach is that some hospitals by the nature of particular operational speciality mix may have higher weights to more or less risky operations as such the inference of this indicator may not work perfectly across all hospitals. However, in blended overall indicator where there is opportunity for hospitals to excel in other care categories I am not too concerned about this possible problem. That said, to avert this concern may be better to further group hospitals into like categories of service mix to comparative purposes. I leave this for further research.  (3)  Readmission rates: Within the readmissions data set there are eight categories of readmission rates. The two incremental categories (denoted with measure ID: READM-30-HIP_KNEE and READM-30-HOSP-WIDE) to the equivalent death rate categories are knee and hip surgery and hospital wide readmission rates respectively. Given the availability of the hospital wide readmission rate, to calculate the readmission rate composite score I simply calculate a z-score of the hospital wide readmission rate of each hospital across all hospitals. Overall, a low readmission rate is preferred over a high readmission rate as a possible indicator of better hospital care. Notably this score has the same possible problem as the mortality rate score.(4) Infection rates: Within the infections data set there are six categories of infection incidence (denoted with measure ID: HAI-1, HAI-2, HAI-3, HAI-4, HAI-5 and HAI-6). For each infection category the data set provides an actual incidence infection rate (numerator) and a predicted infection rate (denominator). The ratio of the two provides a quality of care indicator, i.e. the higher the ratio the worse the care because the infection rate is higher than expected. To calculate the infection rate composite score I calculated the weighted average infection rate ratio for each hospital across the six categories (i.e. sum of actual rates divided by sum of predicted rates) and then calculated a z-score of the average infection rate of each hospital across all hospitals. Accordingly, a low infection rate is preferred over a high infection rate as possible indicator better hospital care. Because the actual infection rate is compared to a predicted infection rate which is based on like hospitals this indicator is less prone to hospital service mix issues like the death and readmission rate scores.Possible shortcomingsAs discussed above there are potential problems relating to operational speciality mix. As a result, some hospitals don’t perform all procedures which can lead to NULL values for some scores in the above weighting procedures. Accordingly, smaller hospitals may end up with few categories aggregated in their underlying scores. If so, and they are particularly efficient, they may score particularly well in this analysis despite less patient turnover.

As such to more likely compare apples with apples I consider it better to exclude the bottom 10% of hospitals on the basis of number of procedures as a guide to likely greater breadth of operational mix and patient turnover. Doing so does exclude 3 of the top ten hospitals in the resulting ranks of this part. The excluded hospitals appear to be either small regionally or specialist healthcare providers.Care consistencyGiven the overall aggregate quality of care score is an aggregate of more than 30 underlying indicators, to score well a hospital generally will need to score well consistently across many of the underlying factors because no one factor has undue weight in the overall score. As such a high score likely also reflects a degree of consistency as well. Hospital level procedural consistency is calculated in part 4 of this project.ResultsThe results of the hospital analysis then simply require a query of the aggregate quality of care score seeking the hospitals with the lowest overall z-score, i.e. the hospitals which have the lowest incidence rates of procedural care deficiencies compared to their peers. Notably the query also requires a JOIN to retrieve the hospital name for the purpose of inclusion in the table below.ID      Care    Death  Readmit  Infect Quality Hospital Name430095  -1.002 -2.684  -2.274   0.002  -1.224  AVERA HEART HOSPITAL OF SOUTH DAKOTA
010125	-1.054	-1.484	-2.274	 -0.284  -1.187	  LAKELAND COMMUNITY HOSPITAL
370215	-0.66	-2.17	-2.517	  0.206	-1.009	  OKLAHOMA HEART HOSPITAL, LLC
670006	-0.921	-0.341	-1.305	 -0.49	-0.854	  THE HOSPITAL AT WESTLAKE MEDICAL CENTER
420087	-0.823	-1.198	-1.668	  0.076	-0.85	  ROPER HOSPITAL
170197	-0.791	-1.598	-1.062	 -0.305	-0.828	  KANSAS MEDICAL CENTER LLC
150157	-0.254	-0.341	-2.881	 -0.271	-0.791	  ST VINCENT CARMEL HOSPITAL INC
180092	-0.786	-0.569	-1.184	 -0.49	-0.784	  CLARK REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER
370026	-0.728	 0.231	-2.153	  0.027	-0.766	  ST MARY'S REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER
161319	-0.792	-3.255	 0.271	 -0.49	-0.765	  CENTRAL COMMUNITY HOSPITALwhere:
ID = provider_id
Care = Timely and effective care z-score
Death = Death rate z-score
Readmit = Readmission rate z-score
Infect = Infection incidence z-score
Quality = Aggregate quality of care z-score
Observation:As flagged by their aggregate z-scores these hospitals are on average around 0.75-1.25 standard deviations better than the broader US hospital group across all the care metrics, which suggests their overall quality of care is meaningfully better than the peer group.