Best StatesWhat states are models of high-quality care?This analysis uses all of the transformed data explained in the best hospitals question (or part 1 of this project).ResultsThe results of the best state analysis require a simple query that joins the aggregate quality of care scores by hospital with their state identifier and calculates an average z-score by state.The states with the lowest average z-scores across all their hospitals, i.e. the hospitals which have the lowest incidence rates of procedural care deficiencies compared to their peers, that are considered to be models of high-quality care are shown in the table below:State  Avg QualitySD      -0.449     (South Dakota)                                                                  
WI      -0.368      (Wisconsin)
MT	-0.328      (Montana)
ND	-0.298      (North Dakota)
CO	-0.29       (Colorado)
WY	-0.281      (Wyoming)
IA	-0.26       (Iowa)
KS	-0.257      (Kansas)
ID	-0.223      (Idaho)
UT	-0.221      (Utah)* Note for my non-US citizen benefit I have included the state names in this report, but they are not part of the output of the query.where:
Avg Quality = simple average of aggregate quality of care z-scores of hospitals by stateObservations:As flagged by their aggregate z-scores these states are on average around 0.22-0.45 standard deviations better than the broader US hospital group across all the care metrics, which suggests that as states their overall quality of care are relative models of high-quality of care compared to other states.Being an Australian and with limited knowledge of the US healthcare system it is hard for me to make informed comments about the intuition of these results. That said the following page has some analysis in the same general topic area and pleasingly the results I get are not too different: https://wallethub.com/edu/states-with-best-health-care/23457/It seems that socio-economic mix, demographic population mix and types of economic activity of the states may be related to the quality of healthcare in the states and also the relative health of the patients attending, which may affect the care outcomes, i.e. less affluence, less education and less exercise may also be a contributor to the relative care outcomes. Notably many of the worst hospital states are in southern America.Naturally the average z-scores of the states are lower than the z-scores of the very best hospitals shown in part 1 of this project.