Correlation with Patient Survey ResponsesAre average scores for hospital quality or procedural variability correlated with patient survey responses?To answer this question it was possible to use the aggregate quality of care scores from part 1 of this project, but for individual hospital procedural variability it was necessary to perform a simple query that calculated the coefficient of variation across the procedures (defined in part 3 of the project) for each hospital (i.e. a simple GROUP BY query).With the two sets of hospital level scores it was then necessary to calculate an overall patient survey response rating for each hospital.Within the survey responses data set there are many individual question responses made public from the HCAHPS 27-question survey, as well as aggregate indicators. In particular there are aggregate Base Score and Consistency Points indicators explained as follows from the HCAHPS Fact Sheet (http://www.hcahpsonline.org/files/HCAHPS%20Fact%20Sheet%20May%202012.pdf):“The Patient Experience of Care Domain score is comprised of two parts: the HCAHPS Base Score (maximum of 80 points) and the HCAHPS Consistency Points score (maximum of 20 points). Each of the eight HCAHPS dimensions contributes to the HCAHPS Base Score through either an Improvement or Achievement score. “Improvement” is the amount of change in an HCAHPS dimension from the earlier Baseline Period to the later Performance Period. “Achievement” is the comparison of each dimension in the Performance Period to the national median for that dimension during the Baseline Period. The larger of the Improvement or Achievement score for each dimension is used to calculate a hospital’s HCAHPS Base Score.The second part of the Patient Experience of Care Domain is the Consistency Points score, which ranges from 0 to 20 points. Consistency Points are designed to target and further incentivize improvement in a hospital's lowest performing HCAHPS dimension.The Patient Experience of Care Domain Score is the sum of the HCAHPS Base Score (0 – 80 points) and HCAHPS Consistency Points score (0 – 20 points), thus ranges from 0 to 100 points, and comprises 30% of the Hospital VBP Total Performance Score.”Accordingly, as my measure of overall patient survey response rating I have aggregated the Patient Experience of Care Domain Score (a score out of 100) using the two underlying componentsNotably not all hospitals appear in the patient survey responses, i.e. just under 3000 compared to ~4,800 hospitals in the full sample. However, the sample still remains of a good size for the purposes of correlation analysis.ResultsCorrelating my aggregate quality of care z-scores (low is good) with the aggregate patient survey response ratings (high is good) yields a correlation of -0.362. While correlating my procedural variability scores (low is good) with the aggregate patient survey response ratings (high is good) yields a correlation of -0.256. ObservationsAs you would intuitively expect there is some positive link (inverse relationship between my two indicators) between good quality of hospital care and better patient survey ratings.Also as you would intuitively expect there is some positive link (inverse relationship between my two indicators) between variability of hospital care and better patient survey ratings.The absolute magnitude of the first correlation being higher than the second also makes sense because for a patient to be able to observe procedural variability on any one visit and effectively incorporate it in their views about the hospital and its care outcomes is much more difficult than observing the first order effect of the level of care experience.